Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we are going to begin setting up an API for our application.
But first, what in the world is an API?
Well, it's an acronym that stands for application programming interface.
But what does that mean?
Well, I think the simplest way to put it into words is if we add an API to our application, the API
will allow other applications to communicate with our application, or in other words, an API will
make our data and functionality accessible through programmatic requests instead of just available through
clicking on buttons within our HTML templates.
So, for example, we've been working on a web application, but what if we wanted to create an iOS
version or an Android native version of our app?
Or what if we wanted to create a native Windows, Mac or Linux desktop version of our application?
The point being, what if we wanted to create a version of our application where the user interface
is not powered by an HTML rendering engine?
Well, we'd want our express server that we've been working on to be able to expose the data and functionality
of our app in a way that is decoupled from HTML and cookies and just the Web browser environment in
general.
Right.
We want to expose our data and functionality in a very open ended and flexible and just sort of raw
data fashion.
Now, we're not going to recreate 100 percent of our apps functionality through our API in this lesson,
because not only would that make this lesson too long, but it would also be very repetitive.
So we're just going to walk through a few examples and then you will have everything you need to take
the API as far as you want to take it.
So, for example, we are not going to make user registration available through our API.
Let's just make up an arbitrary rule that if you want to register for our application, you must do
it through our Web app.
However, let's imagine that we do want to allow existing users to be able to log in and authenticate
programmatically through our API.
So big picture, our goals for this lesson will be to let a user log in, create a new post and delete
one of their existing posts all through our API so they would be able to perform those actions from
anywhere, any application environment that can send an HTTP request.
So that could be an iOS and Android app, a desktop app for Windows, Mac or Linux, anything.
Now, obviously, it's outside the scope of this course to actually create an iOS or Android or desktop
app.
So we're not actually going to create another app.
We're just making the functionality of this app available from anywhere.
Right.
We are exposing the data and functionality of this app to be leveraged in a universal way.
Now, since we're not actually creating an iOS or Android or Windows app, the question becomes, how
are we going to test things right?
How are we going to send a request to our apps API?
Well, the industry standard answer to that question is Postman Postman is a free tool that is incredibly
helpful while building an API, not only is it free to download, but you don't need to sign up for
an account whatsoever.
So right now, I want you to pause this video, download and install postman.
You can either just Google for Postman or the domain is get postman dot com from the homepage, look
for a download link.
Or as of the day that I'm recording this video, this gets started button on the homepage on a larger
screen.
It will be on the left hand side.
Just click the get started button and then that should take you to a screen where it's very obvious
where to download it from.
Whether you're on Windows, Mac or Linux, there's a version available for you.
So go ahead and pause the video while you download and install Postman.
OK, at this point I will assume that anyone moving forward has installed Postman.
So this is what the application looks like.
Or by default, I believe the left hand sidebar might be visible.
Either way, you can toggle the sidebar with this button in the bottom left corner.
OK, let's go ahead and send our first request using Postman.
If you don't already see a screen that looks like this, that's OK.
Just go ahead and click this plus symbol.
It almost looks like you would create a new tab in a web browser or you should be able to also press
control T on Windows or command T on Mac to open up a new tab for a new request.
So he.
You see a text field where we can enter a Eurail, and at first glance you might be thinking, Brad,
what is the point of this application?
Can't we just send an HTTP get request to a U.
RL from within our Web browser?
Well, yes, you could, but Postman makes it very easy to send any type of request.
Right, get request, a post request, and then outside the context of a traditional HTML form, there
are all sorts of other request types.
So not only the postman make it easy to choose your request, but also it makes it very easy to add
whatever sort of body fields or JSON payload or headers.
Basically, Postman makes it very easy to send different types of requests instead of having to write
front end JavaScript or program the web browser to send a certain type of request.
I would almost prefer to postman as a request playground.
Right.
It's this program where it's very easy to send very specific types of requests wherever and however
you want.
So let's give ourselves an example.
Let's imagine.
So type this into the request you are imagine we want to send a request to HTP Colon Eglash local host
colon three thousand slash API slash log in.
Right.
Remember, we had a few goals for this lesson.
We want to let our users log in programmatically and we also wanted them to create a post and be able
to delete one of their posts.
So we're going to start with the login ability.
So imagine they would send a post request to change this to a post request to this you URL.
And in order to log in, you would also need to send along your username and password.
So to do that, let's just send a bit of JSON data along with this request to do that, I want you to
click on the headers tab down here.
So once you click on headers, we just want to click into this area under key and for the key value
type in uppercase C for content dash type and then for its matching value type in lowercase application
slash JSON.
OK, now click on to the body tab.
And this is where we include the actual JSON data.
Go ahead and click on the raw option here and now.
This is where we can type in JSON.
So an object, so curly brackets and then in between those, let's give it a property in JSON.
You actually need to wrap your property names in quotes.
So double quotes.
The first property would be user name after the quotes include a colon and then quotes with your username.
So for me, that's Brad.
Right.
So that's just the username that you've been using to log into our app for the entire course.
And then we would say comma and then give it another property in quotes, let's say password, colon
and then quotes and I'm going to give it a wrong password on purpose just so we can really test out
the server to make sure that it's rejecting invalid login attempts.
So you can just include anything for the password value.
OK, and now if we actually send this request to our server, obviously it's not going to work because
we never set up a route for slash API slash login.
So let's go do that right now.
So jump into your text editor and we just want to tell our Express app what it should do for that route.
Right.
Slash API slash log in.
Now, believe it or not, instead of jumping into our rutabagas file, I actually want us to go into
our app JS file.
And what we're going to do is create a separate router just for slash API roots.
And we would not need any of this code to be applied to those API raft's because the API routes are
not going to need anything to do with sessions or cookies or HTML templates or SRF tokens.
We don't need to worry about any of that for our API roots, so we want our API roots to be lean, mean,
clean and lightweight.
So let's do this up at the top of this file right below.
When you say CONSED app equals express, if you have a couple of other packages that you're including
after that, that's OK.
But we just want to make sure that we add this new line before any of our code that adds features to
our roots.
Essentially, any time you see app use, that's going to run those functions for every route or I should
say for every route that's listed below.
Those aptness lines, so what we want to do is up at the very top, just after we've included all of
our required packages, let's say this app use within those parentheses for the first argument, let's
say a string of text that is slash API, OK, and then comma for the second argument.
This file doesn't exist yet.
We can create it in just a moment.
Let's just require in a file so required within those parentheses quotes and then dot forward slash
to look in the current directory and we're going to name our new file, Rueter Dash API.
OK, now since we set up the router towards the top of the file, all of the code that says app use,
none of these will be applied to these routes.
So they should be very lightweight, very fast and responsive.
However, we do need to go move or cut and paste two features to live above this line.
So for me, it's a round line, number 43 and 44.
It'll likely be a bit different for you, but you need to go find the lines that are app use, express.
You are all encoded and app use express JSON.
If you need to pause the video while you go find these two lines of code, that's OK.
But once you find them, go ahead and cut those into your clipboard.
OK, so we got rid of them down here and then up at the top, just right above our new app use API line
right above that.
Just paste in your clipboard.
Cool.
This way, Express will still be able to read incoming body request data and JSON data.
But really, that's all we need to apply to our API roots.
So at this point, let's go ahead and save this file and now let's go create our new router API file.
So within the root of your project, just create a new file.
Let's name it router dash API JS within this brand new empty file, let's say CONSED and you could make
up any variable name you want, but let's call it API router equals and then we would just require in
the official express router.
So require the official express package.
And then at the very end of that line after the parentheses say dot uppercase router, OK, on a new
line we would want to export this right.
So that it's available from our main file that's importing this file.
So down at the very bottom of this file, say module dot exports equals the constant variable name we
just chose.
So API router cool.
Now in between these two lines, we are free to add routes.
So for example, we would just say API router and then if you wanted a git request, it would be get
in this case, we want a post request.
The first argument is the you the route that you want to listen for and this would be slash login.
We actually do not need to include the beginning slash API slash login.
We don't need to include that because back in Applegate's we said use this router for the API routes.
So the API is just sort of assumed or pretended to any of our routes within this file.
So back in our new router file, we don't need to include the beginning slash API, so just log in,
OK?
And then after this first arguments or after those quotes, let's say comma and include a function that
we want to run for this route before we worry about hooking up our user controller, let's just include
an anonymous function.
Right here is a function parentheses curly brackets within these function parentheses include request,
comma response.
And then in the body of this function, let's just send back a bit of JSON.
So response JSON quotes.
Let's just say thank you for trying to log in from our API.
OK, let's go ahead and save this.
Also, make sure you've saved app J.S. And now if we jump back into Postman right where we were going
to send a post request to localhost, call in three thousand slash API slash login.
Well go ahead and click the send button to send that request.
Well now towards the bottom of your screen, you might need to scroll down if your screen is small,
but here we see the response from the server.
But this response is not very interesting because it's going to be this exact response whether you typed
in a correct username and password or not.
So at this point, let's jump back into our new router file and let's go ahead and import in our controller
files and then work on plugging in.
Logic to see if the username and password were actually correct or not.
Now, when it comes to importing our controller files here, we can save a ton of typing by just jumping
into our original main router file.
So jump into router rutabagas and up towards the top here we see the three lines that require in our
three different controllers.
So I would just select those three controller lines, copy that.
And then back in our new router file up at the top right after our API router line, just paste in your
clipboard.
Cool.
Now let's update this route.
Let's get rid of this anonymous function.
So essentially get rid of the second argument.
Right.
So now we just have the route and then a comma and then let's do this.
Let's look within our user controller.
And this function doesn't exist yet, but let's call API uppercase.
Log in.
OK, let's go ahead and save this.
And now we better go into our user controller file and create a function with this matching name.
So within our controllers folder, jump into user controller and in order to save a ton of typing,
let's actually find our current function that is named login.
So for me, it's around line number fifty two.
It begins with exports, login equals.
And what I would do is just select this function, copy and paste it and then rename the new copy.
So select the exports that log in function, copy it and then right below it, just paste it in and
on this new duplicate copy, change the name to API and then uppercase log in.
OK, now this code is already going to talk to the user model and it already has the logic to determine
if the username and password are correct or not.
So really, all we need to do is just decouple this from the web browser environment so we don't need
to worry about sessions.
We don't need to worry about flash messages, and we don't need to worry about redirecting anywhere.
So let's do this.
If the login is successful, the then function will run.
So let's just hollow out that function.
So I would begin deleting from request session, not user and then also delete this request session
to save.
So I would delete these four lines of code.
And for now, let's just send back a response.
So response JSON and let's just say just as a quick test and a bit of a joke, we can say good job,
that is a real username and password.
And then if the username and password are not correct, then the catch function will run.
So again, just hollow out that function.
So delete these four lines and let's say response JSON.
Sorry, your values are not correct.
OK, let's go ahead and save this and now jump back into Postman and test it out.
So if I scroll back up, remember I'm purposely sending over an incorrect password.
So if I go ahead and send this request once again, click the send button, scroll down to see the servers
response.
Sorry, your values are not correct, but if I go back up to the postman body area and change the password
value to the super secure value of Quartey Quartey and then if I click send.
Now I see the response from the server.
Good job, that is a real username and password.
But let's be honest, this type of response is not very interesting either.
However, this video was mainly about laying out the groundwork or skeleton for our API.
So at this point, we've set up a brand new router designed for our API roots and we are successfully
leveraging our controllers that are talking to our models, looking up data in the database and performing
our logic.
All of that to say that I know this sort of message is not very exciting, but we are perfectly set
up to make a ton of progress in the next video.
So assuming a user does type in a matching username and password, what would we actually want to send
them back as a response that will allow them to do meaningful things?
Right.
How can we authenticate them so that they could create a post or delete one of their existing posts?
Well, in our next video, we are going to learn about a technology named JSON Web tokens.
And I think you're going to be legitimately surprised at how powerful they are.
So let's keep things rolling and I will see you in the next video.